Welcome to the program.
We have many spiritual gems to share with you.
For example, how can we build a good relationship with Jehovah
despite a difficult upbringing?
The story of Demetrius and Agis is very encouraging.
And how can we continue to honor our marriagemate,
even if he or she is an unbeliever?
Notice how Emma has learned to do just that with her husband Thomas
despite their differences.
And this month's music video highlights who really is a true friend.
This is the November 2018 program of J.W. Broadcasting.
Our adversary, Satan the Devil, will do all he can to break our integrity
and destroy our friendship with Jehovah.
Meet Brother Victor Vinter.
He is a Russian brother who lives in Germany.
In 1958, at the age of 21, Brother Vinter was sent to a Siberian labor camp
simply for practicing his faith in Jehovah.
In total, he spent 13 years in multiple Soviet prison camps
and five years in exile.
Despite the persecution, he maintained his Christian qualities.
On July 24, 1958, I got baptized.
And on November 5, 1958, I already got arrested for refusal to do military service.
The second time I was convicted was again for refusal to do military service.
The next court trial took place in 1963.
I got seven years and five years exile.
They added three years that I did not serve for refusal to go to the army.
I was taken to Mordovia.
This was the first camp where all believers were put
amongst them 360 of Jehovah's Witnesses.
The detentions were very strict
because around this time the governments and party politics changed.
They decided that prisoners must suffer hunger.
The food Russians were cut.
This was very difficult, very difficult I must say.
And the winters can be cold.
Even in March, he could get his cold 35 degrees Celsius.
Minus 35.
Spiritual things were for all of us the brothers in this camp top priority.
First of all, all 360 people were divided into four congregations
and every congregation was divided into groups.
Every congregation had responsible brothers as overseers
and so had every group.
We conducted the study not just once a week.
We conducted the study every day, every day.
And brothers took this very seriously.
We had no time for any worldly thoughts.
Every Saturday and Sunday we had a very powerful choir men's voices.
When we were singing, we stationed guards near the oversight house
where supervisors were on duty.
And if one of them came out, it was signalled from one brother to the next
so that if he or they came closer, we would already be gone.
But the most interesting thing was we were singing in the zone.
We were the prisoners.
But our listeners were outside.
They were sitting up in the trees.
The children of the supervisors, officers and guards.
And they were listening to our choir.
All together during that time, I was in seven prison camps.
I spent about 13 years there and another five years in exile in Siberia.
But when I was convicted the last time,
the head of the interrogation department came into my cell and said,
Victor, when you finish all your prison terms, you will have nothing at all.
No family, no children.
I smiled at him and asked,
how do you know this citizen Lieutenant Colonel?
I don't know it either.
But I do trust in Jehovah.
Today I do have a family and do have my wife, my children.
We continue to serve Jehovah.
And my greatest joy is when my six-year-old granddaughter
stands next to me in the Kingdom Hall and sings songs that praise Jehovah.
Well, to make it simple, I would put it this way.
Preserve your love for Jehovah and for your brothers.
Joy in Jehovah's service.
Never lose it.
We will not fear anything bad.
Neither cold nor hunger.
Nothing.
Did you notice the evil words of the head of the interrogation department?
You will have nothing at all.
No family, no children.
Today, Brother Vinter is over 80 years old.
What a blessing.
As you can see that he is now surrounded by a big family.
By maintaining his theocratic routine, even under persecution,
Brother Vinter avoided developing bitter feelings toward his persecutors.
In this way, he maintained his relationship with Jehovah
and he conquered the evil with the good.
And that is also the theme for this month's program.
Keep conquering the evil with the good.
This challenging exhortation was written by the Apostle Paul at Romans 1221.
It's challenging because we live in a world that is alienated from God and the truth.
A world that tries to squeeze everyone into its mold.
Isaiah 520 shows how the world has changed God-given standards.
It reads,
Wall to those who say that good is bad and bad is good.
Those who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness.
Those who put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter.
By adhering to the standard of healthful words in the scriptures
and to the examples of faithful servants of the past,
we can conquer the evil with the good.
The faithful man, Inak, was born when Adam was about 600 years old,
which means that Inak and Adam were contemporaries for about 300 years.
However, there is no record of any contact between them during that period of time.
The scriptures indicate that violence and hate for God were widespread in that pre-flood world.
Many centuries later, the disciple Jude describes the fear-inspiring prophecy
that God gave to Inak about Jehovah coming with his holy myriads,
legions of mighty angels in battle array to bring destruction to all the ungodly.
Inak fearlessly went about declaring the coming judgment and destruction
and what is more, he did it alone.
The prophecy was fulfilled in the global deluge
and it set the pattern of a greater destruction yet to come.
No wonder that Genesis 524 tells us that Inak kept walking with the true God.
Inak's example gives us courage to remain firm for true worship,
even if family and friends stand apart from us.
Inak did not try to fit in with the evil crowd of the pre-flood world
and we don't want to fit in with the present dying world and its evil ways.
We may feel alone at times, but we are reminded that Jehovah never abandoned Inak
and neither will he abandon his faithful servants today.
We imitate Inak by not allowing the evil surrounding us to undermine our faith in Jehovah.
Like Inak, we can conquer the evil with the good by avoiding bad associations,
sticking close to Jehovah God on the earthly part of his organization
and boldly proclaiming the good news.
Elisha the prophet refused to engage in paying evil for evil,
even when it seemed justified.
The account is found at 2 Kings, chapter 6, verses 14 to 23.
Syria was at war with Israel.
The king of Syria was enraged because Elisha was able to foresee
wherever it was that Syria was planning to ambush the Israelites.
Elisha would warn the king of Israel and he in turn would keep his troops away from the place of ambush.
The king of Syria became exasperated and wanted desperately to take the prophet Elisha captive
to stop him from warning the king of Israel.
It came about that the king of Syria learned that Elisha was in the city of Dothan.
So all the kings sent horses, war chariots, as well as a large army to surround Dothan by night
in order to take Elisha captive.
The following morning, Jehovah listened to Elisha and did something amazing.
He struck the Syrian troops with the temporary form of blindness.
And Elisha guided all those troops, not back to Syria,
but to Samaria where the king of Israel resided.
The king of Israel was anxious to strike down and kill the Syrian troops.
But Elisha said to him as recorded in verses 22 and 23 of 2 Kings, chapter 6.
You must not strike them down. Do you strike down those whom you have taken captive with your sword and with your bow?
Give them bread and water so they may eat and drink and return to their Lord.
So he spread a great feast for them and they ate and drank, after which he sent them away to return to their Lord.
What a shock this must have been to the Syrian soldiers who likely thought that they were as good as dead.
This astounding turn of events was far better than paying evil for evil.
How do we know it was better?
The latter part of verse 23 says,
And not once did the marauder bands of the Syrians come again into the land of Israel.
Can you imagine the men of the Syrian army relating to their king what had taken place?
They went out to take Elisha captive.
However, Elisha with the help of Jehovah Spirit had taken the Syrians captive without a battle.
The Syrian king must have been dumbfounded when he heard the report.
And you can be sure that the soldiers of the Syrian army were not only grateful,
but they acquired a very respectful fear of Jehovah and of his prophet Elisha.
The good done to the Syrians would not be soon forgotten.
Like Elisha, we want to do what is good for people, including those who do not view us favorably.
When tragedies such as fires, floods, earthquakes, and hurricanes strike,
we go out of our way to comfort people with the Scriptures.
Also, Jehovah's Witnesses serving as relief workers are well known for the practical assistance they render to fellow believers and to others.
As a result, many people have changed their view of us and have come to appreciate
that in these last days, Jehovah does indeed have a people for his name on the earth.
At 2 Timothy 2 verses 23 through 25,
the Apostle Paul encourages us to display qualities that make us different from the world.
He says, further, reject foolish and ignorant debates,
knowing that they produce fights. For a slave of the Lord does not need to fight,
but needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach, showing restraint when wronged,
instructing with mildness those not favorably disposed.
And then Paul explains the desired result. Perhaps God may give them repentance leading to an accurate knowledge of truth.
Paul was gentle toward all and qualified to teach.
He showed restraint when he was imprisoned by the Roman authorities around 60 or 61 CE.
He spent about two years under house arrest and Rome, perhaps even being chained to a guard.
He had done nothing to merit imprisonment.
However, he did not dwell on the evil done to him,
and he did not allow it to make him bitter and resentful of Roman authorities.
Rather, in Philippians 1 verses 12 through 14, Paul wrote,
Now I want you to know, brothers, that my situation has actually turned out for the advancement of the good news,
so that my prison bonds for the sake of Christ have become public knowledge among all the Praetorian guard and all the rest.
Now, most of the brothers in the Lord have gained confidence because of my prison bonds,
and they are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.
In his letter to Titus, at chapter 3 verses 1 and 2,
Paul gives reminders on how Christians today can conquer the evil with the good
by showing proper respect for governmental authorities wherever we may live.
He writes,
Continue reminding them, fellow Christians, to be in subjection and to be obedient to governments and authorities.
To be ready for every good work, to speak injuriously of no one,
not to be quarrelsome, but to be reasonable, displaying all mildness toward all men.
Paul followed his own advice.
While in custody in Rome, Paul wrote inspired letters to Christian congregations in Greece and Asia Minor,
and we today benefit from the council in those letters.
Never do we read in his letters criticism aimed at human rulers or encouragement for Christians
to favor one political figure or party over another.
He was no part of the world,
and he knew that man's only hope was the kingdom of God.
Paul was a spiritual man, and he conquered the evil with the good
by following Jesus' instructions at Mark 12-17,
of giving Caesar's things to Caesar,
but God's things to God,
all the while displaying a mildness that belongs to wisdom.
At first Peter, 221,
we receive further direction about the course that we are to follow.
Peter writes,
In fact, to this course you were called,
because even Christ suffered for you,
leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.
Some of Christ's steps are enumerated in verses 22 and 23,
where it reads,
he, Jesus, committed no sin,
nor was deception found in his mouth.
When he was being insulted,
he did not insult in return.
When he was suffering,
he did not threaten,
but he entrusted himself to the one who judges righteously.
Jehovah is the one who judges righteously.
However, the Jewish religious leaders did not judge the Christ righteously.
They insulted Jesus frequently,
and even accused him of having a demon.
Jesus did not stoop to return evil for evil,
hurling insults or threatening people.
Insults and threats do not open hearts to accept the good news.
When Jesus was on trial,
the Jewish religious leaders spurred the crowd on to cry out for his execution.
The Roman authorities had Jesus nailed to a torture stake to suffer a cruel and excruciating death.
While suffering on the torture stake,
what did Jesus speak about?
Did he curse the Roman soldiers who had mistreated him and were now executing him?
To the contrary,
he conquered the evil with the good.
Among Jesus' last words are those recorded at Luke 2334.
Father, forgive them,
for they do not know what they are doing.
Jesus knew that the Roman soldiers were ignorant of who he really was
and did not know what they were doing.
He could forgive them with the hope that they would eventually respond to the truth
and become his disciples.
In every respect,
Jesus conquered the evil with the good,
and he always displayed complete confidence
in the one who judges righteously, Jehovah God.
We want to demonstrate the same kind of confidence in Jehovah
and in His Word that Jesus displayed.
We do our best to imitate the Christ
by applying the Spirit-inspired counsel at Romans 12 verses 17 and 18.
Return evil for evil to no one.
Take into consideration what is fine from the viewpoint of all men.
If possible, as far as it depends on you,
be peaceable with all men.
Heating this counsel is particularly important in homes that are religiously divided.
The Christian maid resists the temptation to repay an unkind word or act with another unkindness.
Really, no good comes from returning evil for evil.
On the contrary, such an attitude can only aggravate the situation.
In the domestic setting, a wife who shows genuine kindness to her husband
after he makes unpleasant comments about her beliefs
may well diffuse a potentially explosive situation.
At Proverbs 31-12, we are told how a capable God-fearing wife deals with her husband.
She rewards Him with good, not bad, all the days of her life.
Additionally, by taking into consideration what is fine from the viewpoint of all men,
Jehovah's people have often overcome prejudice
by providing practical assistance to their neighbors as opportunity affords
and particularly when a disaster strikes.
We conscientiously adhere to Romans 12-19,
which states,
do not avenge yourselves beloved,
but yield place to the wrath for it is written.
Vengeance is mine.
I will repay, says Jehovah.
The footnote on verse 19 shows that Paul is telling us to yield to God's wrath or anger.
Jehovah is the one who will set matters straight,
and he will do it much better than we ever could.
As James 1-20 states,
man's anger does not bring about God's righteousness.
The theme of this discussion is summarized exquisitely at Romans 12-20 and 21
with this direction to all of Jehovah's people.
But if your enemy is hungry, feed him.
If he is thirsty, give him something to drink.
For by doing this, you will heap fiery coals on his head.
Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil,
but keep conquering the evil with the good.
Let's now turn to a modern-day example of conquering evil with good.
In South Korea, 19,000 of our brothers have at some point been imprisoned for their Christian neutrality.
But inside the prison walls, our brothers have the support of their fellow Christians.
We met a group of brothers who still cherished the friendships they developed while imprisoned,
although it's been about 40 years since their release.
When I was 21 years old,
I was sent to prison in the Nonsan Military Training Center
because I refused to serve in the military.
The soldier working in the military prison came and started to beat me,
and he beat me relentlessly.
It was late December 1975.
Four of the brothers were put into standing solitary confinement cells,
called Dokgochang.
It literally feels like you're in a coffin.
The outside temperature dropped to minus 13 degrees Celsius,
and cold air seeped out from the wet walls.
The brothers couldn't lay down to sleep, so they had to crouch.
And I could hear them groaning all night.
I extended my hand through the iron bars to the brother in the cell next to mine,
and he did the same.
We held hands and encouraged each other to stay strong.
My health condition wasn't really good while serving my prison sentence.
I weighed about 47 kilograms, and without my family support,
I was mentally and physically weak.
Under these extremely difficult circumstances,
there were times I wasn't able to eat at all.
During those times, the brothers provided me with porridge which was easy to digest,
warm clothing, and a sleeping bag for the winter.
I could really feel their love.
Having been to prison three times, I truly feel that Jehovah showed interest in me,
and took care of me just as he promised in 1st Peter 5.7.
He especially supported me through my brothers when I was facing difficulties.
A day in the prison started with eating breakfast and then moving 300 bricks.
After lunch, we would have to carry another 300 bricks.
Because I usually finished my work early, I had a 20 minute break before going back in.
However, this brother named Park Kyung-man, who was much stronger and bigger than I was,
carried bricks all day long.
I found out later that Park Kyung-man was carrying chess on Q's share of bricks
because of his frail health.
This kind of brotherly love really moved me to start studying the Bible.
I got baptized a year later in April of 1977 in the Ann Young Prison.
After getting baptized, my mother passed away, and two months before being released,
my father passed away as well.
So that time was especially difficult for me.
But the brothers encouraged me with their warm words and kind gestures.
Their encouragement really touched me and helped me to endure until I was released.
One time, I had a severe stomach ache.
The symptoms were not getting any better with the medication I was given,
so I was having a very difficult time.
One day, we would serve some vegetables as a side dish.
And one brother, he crushed and squeezed the vegetables to make juice for me.
He cared for me that way for several days.
I really would like to see that self-sacrificing and loving brother once again.
At the time, none of our publications other than the Bible were allowed into the prison.
Of course, that includes our songbook.
The brothers memorized the lyrics from the songbook, and it would write them down.
Also, there were some songs that were sung at the regional convention.
Songs like...
We sang them silently together, even in this isolated place.
It was a great source of encouragement to share the love among our fellow brothers.
I remember this encouraging scripture from 1 Corinthians chapter 10 verse 13.
It says that Jehovah does not let us be tempted beyond what we can bear and will make the way out so we may endure it.
Although there were many challenges, I was convinced that Jehovah would always make a way out through our fellow brothers.
Even though 40 years have passed, when we look back at those days, the memories are still fresh and we are moved to tears at times.
So to make a meaningful trip out of our 40 years of friendship, all the friends who went through the same trials decided to visit the headquarters in the United States together.
It's really refreshing to be here with everyone again today.
It feels like I'm taking a field trip.
I was especially moved to tears when I saw our old prison uniforms there in the museum at World Headquarters displayed in the neutrality section.
While on the tour, the brothers sat and laid down on the floor inside the Dokkochang.
And we were able to reflect on the times we spent together in prison.
Our gratitude to Jehovah for giving us such loyal friends was renewed.
Yes, through their brotherly love and the power and strength given to them by Holy Spirit, our Korean brothers were able to conquer the evil with the good.
Although we may not be imprisoned, having true friends can help us through many trials.
But what is a true friend? Where can we find them? And why are they so important?
Our music video will answer those questions. It is entitled True Friends.
What a blessing it is to have true friends around us in the Christian congregation.
But at times, our imperfection may create roadblocks between us and our dear friends.
And we may start developing negative feelings about them.
In this Bethel morning worship, pay attention to how brother Jeffrey Jackson of the governing body helps us deal with such thinking.
Well, perhaps we could take out Bibles and turn to Colossians chapter 3 and verse 13.
And let's analyze this verse together and see what is it that Jehovah expects of us.
So in Colossians 3, 13, it says continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely, even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another.
Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.
Or certainly this verse gives us plenty of food for thought, doesn't it? Are areas in which perhaps we can work on and improve in?
But what two things stand out as being required of us?
Well, looking back, you notice the first one, continue putting up with one another and then the second point, forgiving one another freely.
Well, let's look at that first expression, continue putting up with one another.
But what's the difference between these two expressions?
Well, we're told that this first expression doesn't refer to serious sins, but perhaps talks about things that are irritating, annoying.
Things that we may not necessarily have a cause for complaint concerning, but they still get us very upset anyway. These minor things.
What are some of the things that annoy you? Let's be honest.
Are you annoyed when someone is always late?
Are you annoyed when they're always early?
Are you annoyed when someone is outspoken?
Does it annoy you when someone's too quiet?
It's amazing, isn't it? What are the things that annoy us?
I remember back in the 70s, Brother Norgaver, an outstanding talk where he alluded to the fact that maybe there's a sister in the congregation
and she's hearing this other sister, new in the truth, answering up time after time.
And in her heart, she's thinking, why doesn't she just keep quiet?
Well, maybe we've all experienced those feelings.
And if we're judged on them, perhaps we'll agree.
Well, it's not justified. I don't really have a cause, but it still irritates me.
It's true, isn't it? The expression sometimes, it's not the mountains ahead of us that cause problems.
It's the pebble in the shoe. And it's sometimes the small things that irritate us the most.
I remember when I was serving in Western Samoa many years ago at the branch.
We had quite a number of brothers from overseas working on construction.
And there was one brother who had the habit, first in the morning, as he arrived before breakfast, saying,
Good morning to everyone. Some found that annoying.
Maybe you can relate to that.
And no doubt you feel very happy when you read the scripture in Proverbs 27, 14,
where it says in one translation, a loud and cheerful greeting early in the morning is taken as a curse.
You might be thinking, I meant to that.
And that brother ceased his habit after he read that scripture, or at least it was read to him.
But we may not always be able to find a scripture that backs up this irritation that we feel.
So what do we do? Well, what does it say?
Continue putting up with one another. Continue. It's something that we just have to keep on doing.
That brings us to the second part of our verse, forgiving one another freely.
It's interesting when we look at other translations of this verse, most follow the King James version and just say, Forgive.
The New World translation says, Forgive freely.
The reason is that this isn't your normal Greek word for forgiveness.
It denotes generosity, a willingness to go beyond what's required.
It's interesting that the watchtower, even back in 1882, was using that expression to forgive one another freely,
well before the time of the New World translation.
So this gives us something to think about because it's not just a matter of forgiving,
but we need to be generous about forgiving. We have to be willing to, as it were, bestow a pardon
on someone who really doesn't deserve that pardon.
Now, why should we be interested in developing and working on these two aspects,
putting up with one another and forgiving freely?
Well, we've heard the reasons many times before, haven't we?
The first one, of course, is that Jehovah has forgiven us.
If we turn back just one chapter, chapter 2 of Colossians, and verse 13, this point is highlighted for us.
It says in chapter 2, verse 13, Furthermore though, you were dead in your trespasses and in the uncircumcised state of your flesh,
God made you alive together with him. He kindly forgave you all, or forgave us all our trespasses.
So this is the model that Jehovah has given us.
It's true. We sometimes can find some reason why we feel we don't have to forgive someone else,
but remember the illustration Jesus gave of the slave who had the huge dead,
if you calculated in Daenerys, there were 60 million Daenerys that he owed.
He was forgiven that, then he went after the other man who owed him just a small amount.
But have you ever thought, if you asked that slave, maybe he would say,
well, it's true, I really appreciate having everything forgiven, but I still don't have any money.
I need some money, so that's why I wanted to get the other slave to give me the money.
Well, there's always a reason, isn't it? Even if it's a distorted reason,
as to why we don't follow Jehovah's example.
But looking back at Colossians 3, verse 13, what does it say,
if anyone has a cause for complaint against another?
So that gives us a good idea, doesn't it?
The second reason, of course, is that we do need others to forgive us.
The very things that annoy us and irritate us in others
are sometimes the same things that we do to others. Have you ever noticed that?
And how annoying it is when someone points that out to you.
You're annoyed with that person? Don't you realize what you do?
Well, that's something good for us to remember, isn't it?
The fact that we do need to have others forgive us.
And then another reason is that it maintains the peace within the Christian congregation.
The watchtower made the comment on this. It said that in countries where our work is restricted or under ban,
many of our brothers have to meet together in smaller groups.
And when you do that, you get to know everyone's weaknesses, idiosyncrasies.
It's so much easier to be annoyed by others when you're dealing with small groups of persons.
The watchtower then made the comment,
what good training it is for us now to learn how to put up with one another
when we're in larger groups,
because later we may need to worship Jehovah in smaller groups.
So it's good training for us as we keep peace in the congregation.
And what can help us? Well, there are many different things that can help us in this regard.
The one point in the marginal reference you see there is First Peter, chapter 4 and verse 8.
And that's where it tells us we need to have intense love for one another.
Not just love, but intense love.
And this word intense means full strength.
Literally, it means to stretch out our love.
So as we come across these things that irritate us and annoy us in life,
or if we come across persons who actually do sin against us,
what should we keep in mind?
Continue putting up with one another.
Continue freely forgiving one another.
That sound advice also applies strongly in marriage when two people decide to share their lives together.
Perhaps your mate is an unbeliever.
Differences in belief can cause a level of friction.
But how one handles or conquers the situation can bring you peace and even be a great witness.
How did 15 years go by so fast?
We were so young when we got married, maybe too young.
We had so little in common.
When I started studying the Bible,
I thought Thomas would be as excited as I was to learn the truth.
But every conversation we had on the subject seemed to turn into an argument.
Looking back, I really wish I'd handled it better.
As the years went by, he did become more open to discussion.
But it's been hard worshipping God alone.
Others in the congregation are able to serve Jehovah together
and even reach out for theocratic goals like the School for Kingdom Evangelises.
Something I would love to do.
Why can't I have a husband who loves Jehovah like I do?
Abigail probably felt the same way.
But with more reason.
Her husband was a bully and a drunkard
and was despised by his entire household.
At that time, many marriages were arranged,
so Abigail had very little control over her circumstances.
But her words and actions showed that she was a spiritual woman
who didn't focus on what she could not control,
but what she could.
I determined to do the same.
I meditated on Jesus' words at Matthew chapter 19, verse 6,
what God has yoke together, let no man put apart.
To Jehovah, marriage is permanent,
even my marriage to an unbeliever.
So instead of dwelling on changing my husband or my marriage,
I focused on changing myself.
Thomas does not love Jehovah, but he's no neighbor either.
He is loyal and he loves me.
He is entitled to respect the Bible Command's wives to show their husbands,
so I'm making an effort to be more respectful and loving to him.
Thomas hasn't developed an interest in the truth or started studying,
but I have the satisfaction of knowing my God is pleased with me.
And I have the same view of marriage that he does.
How exciting is Thomas slowly noticing the benefits of the truth?
No doubt, Emma's faithful and respectful conduct
has had a deep impact on how he views Jehovah.
And the truth can really change a person.
Getting to know Jehovah can help someone to get their life back on track.
Two fleshly brothers, Dimitris and Agis Sotiropoulos,
are good examples of how the good can conquer the evil
despite a challenging upbringing.
My father was a self-made factory owner.
He started a business working with rubber and plastics.
And we led a financially comfortable way of life.
But in the middle of the 1970s, things started going badly with his work.
For this reason, he fell into a depression and he committed suicide.
This was a great shock.
I went to the wall and wrote the words, he lives.
I didn't want to believe that from that day on, I wouldn't see my father again.
At the age of about 10, I began to develop strong anti-religious tendencies.
And later at the age of 17, I also expressed it by participating
in the most important incident of the student movement against the military junta
that was prevailing in Greece and ruling the country.
I became a member of the Communist Party.
I went to Santorini and started a business. I opened a bar.
Of course, all this included unsavory things like immorality, drugs,
and plenty of alcohol.
A few months later, I left to study in Germany.
It was the first time I met a brother engaging in street work.
People would approach him and some would swear, some even spat at him.
It impressed me immensely how he stood calmly and accepted this treatment.
We had interesting conversations.
My studies ended and I returned to Greece to take on the responsibility of the factory.
When I finished my studies in Germany, I left with a sense of deep respect for Jehovah's Witnesses.
The influence through my friends led me to go in the military.
And there I saw a huge amount of corruption.
The hope I had that we humans would be able to succeed without external help,
without God, began to collapse.
And then the things I had heard from Jehovah's Witnesses suddenly came to my mind.
The same afternoon, I sought out a family friend, the mother of a childhood friend named Lily.
I said to her, please give me a Bible and some Bible study publications.
Because I want to study it, I read everywhere.
And anything that I didn't understand, I wrote down in a notebook.
I got to the point in just a few days where I had written down 80 to 90 questions.
Harry impressed me because every time I asked him a question, he gave me the answer from the Bible.
That convinced me that I had found the truth.
So in that moment, I decided to leave the military and to quit smoking.
A few months passed by, where I was occupied mostly with the factory.
Until I recognized that for me to make progress in the truth, I had to sell my shares in the factory.
And on July 7, 1984, I was baptized.
The authorities, the police, the mayor, the health inspectors began to demand money so that I could keep the bar open.
I refused all the things they asked of me, and so the war became harder.
Until one night, when I went to open the door to enter my home, I heard a trumping from behind.
I tried to turn and see, and as I turned, I was hitting the face.
During that time, when all of this was happening, my brother Dmitrius arrived.
As brothers, we never really had a relationship.
When he came to Santorini and began to talk to me and help me understand what was happening to me,
I realized that this was a different Dmitrius.
I said to him, I want us to start studying the Bible together.
I had the Bible with me almost everywhere I went, so that I could read it.
I realized that Jehovah was helping me to understand what I was living for.
He was helping me to understand that I could have a real goal, a purpose, and hope.
On the day of my baptism, I felt that I was drawing closer to Jehovah.
I felt like my smile went from ear to ear.
And now with Lydia, I have the great joy of serving in the Romani territory.
We enjoy very nice Bible studies.
It is truly something that shows you Jehovah's love, interest, and affection.
Things that I had felt many years ago when I studied with my brother.
Today, my brother and I love each other very much.
It is a relationship characterized by brotherly love, as it is expressed in the Bible.
We are very close to each other.
This is really a change.
Now we are truly brothers.
Today, both Demetrius and Agis serve as elders and have spent many years in the full-time ministry.
Have you noticed the many ways we have seen the good conquer the evil in this month's broadcast?
Our brothers in Korea were able to endure unjust imprisonment with the support of their fellow believers.
Victor Vinter, who was also imprisoned, conquered the evil by maintaining a theocratic routine.
Our music video helped us appreciate the value of our true friends in the congregation,
who will help us fulfill our ministry in this wicked world.
Also, brother Jackson shared principles to help us overcome negative feelings we may have about others as a result of our imperfection.
Over time, Emma learned to apply those principles in dealing with her unbelieving husband, Thomas.
And finally, the truth conquered the evil when the Sotoropolis brothers were able to clean up their lives.
Before we conclude, we have an announcement to make.
You will be happy to know that the next installment of the video series
was it designed, entitled The Sea Horses Tale, is available on video on demand and JW.org starting this month.
Perhaps you can watch it during your next family worship evening.
Let's also briefly visit our brothers and sisters in Portugal.
As the most Western country and continental Europe, Portugal is known as the place where the land ends and the sea begins.
mainland Portugal has over 800 kilometers or over 500 miles of Atlantic coast.
In the southern part of the country, they have over 3,000 hours of sunshine per year.
Portugal became world-renowned as a seafaring nation with colonies around the world.
In the 15th century, navigators and explorers from Portugal traveled to distant places such as Brazil, India, and many parts of Africa.
The good news reached Portugal in 1925, but the work was either restricted or under ban from 1926 to 1974.
However, the brothers and sisters were good examples of conquering the evil with the good.
Despite the restrictions and persecution, they continued to preach and gather together to worship Jehovah.
When the witnesses gained legal recognition in 1974, the country reported about 13,500 publishers and almost 40,000 attended the first public meeting.
Today, the country reports some 49,500 publishers and the ratio of one publisher to about 200 people, one of the lowest ratios in Europe.
The ratio is even lower in Almada, which is across the Tegas River from the capital city Lisbon.
In Almada, there are 16 congregations with almost 1,400 publishers in total, with a ratio of one publisher to about 100 residents.
Many of the brothers and sisters in Almada are older and endured faithfully during the ban, setting an example to the younger ones.
In addition to theocratic activities, our brothers and Almada regularly come together to associate, which can include a game of soccer or singing songs.
They all send their love and greetings to the worldwide brotherhood.
This is JW Broadcasting from the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses.